Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley, I'm Tom Turbyville.
Over the last two and a half years of Veterans of the Valley, we have been honored to share the stories of 74 Brazos Valley veterans.
The very first was Dr. Jim Cooper.
We taped that show on March the 1st, 2005.
It was new territory for me.
It was new territory for KAMU-TV.
It is my pleasure to welcome back to Veterans of the Valley, Dr. James F. Cooper, World War II veteran and our 75th veteran guest here on Veterans of the Valley.
Go back 30 months ago, and I can remember this set, Jim.
We didn't have the nice flags.
It was just a black set.
I wasn't sure what I was doing.
You weren't sure what you were doing.
We were both kind of nervous.
I'm still not.
You were the guinea pig for this show, and thankfully you were because 75 veterans later, we're still here.
You kind of remember that day.
You were nervous.
I was nervous.
New territory for me, and I thought you said 75 years ago we taped the first one.
It wasn't quite that long.
Not quite.
It was about two and a half years ago, but it was a lot of fun.
And thank you for starting this off because it's been a great service to the veterans of the Brazos Valley, I think, and 74 veterans, and here you are back again.
I think it's been something that the veterans appreciate.
Tom, it was a privilege to be here, and certainly I'm happy that it has gone as well as it has gone for you and for the veterans.
Well, we thank KAMU-TV and our underwriter, First National Bank, for keeping it going, and we really appreciate it, and thank you for starting it off.
As a matter of fact, let's sort of take a look at what you and I looked like two and a half years ago.
Let's take a little clip of that very first show, Veterans of the Valley, that we taped in March of 2005.
Here we go.
You are a practicing physician now.
We're going to talk a little bit about that more later, but I want to talk about your service in World War II in Korea.
You were a young teenager right after VJ Day, and you saw a lot of remnants of the war as a very young man.
Tom, I was 17 when I enlisted and then went to boot camp and was on my way to Japan.
when World War II ended with the dropping of the first A-bomb.
And there are questions that come up about whether or not I'm in favor of having dropped those two A-bombs, and the answer is always overwhelmingly yes, because had those two bombs not been dropped, I might not have been here.
I would have been in the first invasion forces
going into Japan and it was estimated that there would have been four million casualties had we invaded Japan, three million Japanese and one million allied forces and so even though there was a great, great sacrifice of life with those two bombs and we wish we had not
had to drop them.
It was a necessary thing.
It was something that saved countless millions of lives and we're sorry that some people had to be sacrificed for that.
And 75 veterans later, we're still here.
And thankfully we are.
Let's talk about Dr. Jim Cooper.
You were a Navy man.
You were in World War II.
You also, during the Korean War, served in the North Atlantic.
But you've served actually at two different times, before and after your schooling.
Sort of talk about your first hitch of duty.
Tom, I was barely 18 years old and I thought Japan was just the other side of Fulton, Kentucky when I enlisted.
And I did go to the Great Lakes Naval Training Center and then was on the way to Japan when the first two atom bombs were dropped.
And people always ask me, do I agree that they should have been dropped?
And my answer is profoundly yes, because had they not been dropped, I probably wouldn't be here.
They estimated there'd be one and a half
Allied, million Allied casualties, four and a half million Japanese casualties.
Even though the bombs were horrible, they saved millions of lives and much grief and misery.
Talk about serving as a physician in World War II and sort of what kind of a job that was, the responsibility, and your main memories of that.
Because you served on a lot of ships.
You were kind of a ship hopper to different destroyers taking care of people, right?
Tom, that was the Korean conflict.
World War II, I was not a physician.
Right, right, right.
The Korean conflict, I was a destroyer squadron medical officer.
I had eight destroyers and one very famous destroyer in that squadron was the USS Sullivans that was named after the five Sullivan brothers who perished in World War II aboard the cruiser Juno.
I could ride any ship I wanted to.
My operating room and my operating table was the officer's mess table that we had to clear off if, in fact, I did have to operate.
That's right.
One of the ships that you served on was the USS Admiral Benson, and you told me one time about a hurricane.
I guess we called it a tsunami now that you went through.
We called it a typhoon, Tom.
That occurred in 1945 at Okinawa.
And years and years later, I was speaking to Mr. Travis Bryan and Mr. George Ferrari here in Bryan, found out that the three of us were on that ship at the same time and we didn't know it until about 10 years ago.
Wow.
Very, very bad typhoon, and incidentally they're having one there today.
Exactly, exactly.
You served in Bethesda, Maryland, and obviously that was something very unique, obviously, for you.
And you saw a lot of the famous characters of World War II come through that place while you were serving there.
Tom, I was there in 1952 as an intern, and of course the World War II older officers in the Navy were coming through Bethesda.
We had four five-star admirals on the floor at one time while I was there.
Halsey, Nimitz, Halstead, and I can't remember the other one, but they were
fairly unique peep king was the other one right and it was a privilege to be there when all of these world war ii historical characters came through yes even shirley temple was there shirley temple was there as a patient her husband was a commander in the navy downtown washington during the korean conflict and she and her children came to bethesda all the time
You recently gave a speech at the Veterans of Foreign Wars.
It was, I believe it was Memorial Day observance.
with the VFW and the American Legion and the DAV and you gave a speech.
Can you talk a little bit about that speech?
Tom, the main theme of the speech was to memorialize the people who had given their lives for the freedoms that we now enjoy in the United States and I made one point about standing before the tomb of the unknown soldier and wondering who he was, wondering how he was as a little boy, wondering about his mother who
when told that her little boy was not coming home, that he was a casualty of war, how she must have felt.
And then I've wondered how many other mothers have stood before the three unknown tombs there now wanting to reach inside, wondering if their little boy might have been inside, but of course it wouldn't be until the great resurrection day.
Exactly.
It was quite a moving speech and I know that they appreciate that.
And this takes me to
What I want to ask you about your passion for your fellow veterans, the VFW.
You've been very active in the VFW.
You were past commander of the VFW.
Obviously, this means a lot to you, being a veteran and honoring your fellow veterans and hoping that people continue to do that.
Tom, I can't say enough and I cannot do enough to help the veterans of past wars, nor can I do enough and will continue to try to do things for the veterans of the war that is going on now.
There is nothing that we could ever do to repay somebody for a lost arm, a lost eye,
or their life.
And to these people I have nothing but the utmost respect.
I have nothing but the desire to continue to honor these people who have sacrificed so much for our freedoms.
You were born in Farmersville, Louisiana.
You were the six of seven children of Clara and Oliver Cooper.
And one of your brothers is a gentleman that people in the Brazos Valley knew very well.
O.C.
Cooper is your brother and one of the utmost also physicians here in this town.
Talk about O.C.
Cooper.
You were very close to your brother.
O.C.
and I were very close.
He was five years ahead of me in medical school, but was still remembered when I got there.
And probably was the reason that I did go to medical school in that I was inclined more in the engineering area than in the medical area.
But I went to visit him a couple of times.
And after visiting him, then I had a burning desire to go to medical school.
So I really give him the credit for getting me into medical school.
Indeed.
We've got a lot of pictures to show, so I want to get started with it.
These are pictures that you supplied to us from your youth.
We're going to take you all the way from when you were a kid in a football uniform and take you all the way up to the present.
So let's go ahead and go to some of these pictures right there.
Look at that head of hair, my goodness gracious.
A lot of curly hair, a lot of curly hair.
Yeah.
I won't take my cap off now.
To show people what's left of it.
About how old were you in that picture?
14.
14 years old.
That was in Carroll, Illinois, where I went to high school.
Which is where you grew up.
Part of the time.
That was the Carroll, Illinois football team.
All you got to do is look for the big head of hair, number 99.
That was old 99, and oh, I was so bad then, it was unreal.
The opposing teams just left the field when I came out.
I bet you played every position.
Well, not quite.
Tackle and guard.
Okay.
Let's move on.
Here's you and your brothers.
There is OC on my right, Brian immediately to my right, and all three of us were in the armed forces.
Brian was a Korean veteran and got a battlefield promotion in Korea, and I had just graduated from the Great Lakes Naval Training Center when that picture was made.
Right.
You're on the right, of course.
Correct.
In the Navy uniform.
Okay.
And here I am in the Pacific on the way back from Japan.
That probably was in 1946 at some time, and there was a little storm behind us, but we were on the way anyway in an LST that was like being in a bathtub in the Pacific.
There I am and this is why the Japanese collapsed because when they saw this picture and knew I was coming they just folded.
They didn't really need to drop the atom bombs.
They saw those leggings and they said... They saw me and it was dangerous to look at me.
Oh, this is an interesting picture because you're a singer.
You're seated on the far right.
Talk about what was happening in this picture.
Well, this was a group of Korean War veterans who were in the Naval Hospital at Bethesda, and I had been assigned the duty of taking them out to a country club on the edge of Washington.
I think it was in Rockville.
Maryland for them to have a little rest and recreation and the entertainer I can't remember who he was but he was playing the accordion obviously and we were all singing but I had my lips all puckered up whistling because I didn't sing too well I don't think an enjoyable day Richard Nixon came out as vice president and spoke to us that day I'll be darned
and it was an enjoyable time.
There's the APB-46, and it's built and looks just like a bathtub, and when it's underway, it rolls like a bathtub, and that was an LST that had been converted into a supply ship.
Those big doors on the front opened, and one day I opened them, couldn't get them back together again, and we were getting ready to get underway, and it was sort of a shaky time there for a while, but we did get them closed again.
Usually tanks came out of the front.
That's the USS Admiral Benson.
There were 5,000 of us on there, and in that typhoon, the waves were actually higher than those stacks.
We would go down in between the waves and look up at the crest of the waves in the typhoon at Okinawa.
A lot of fond memories on that ship.
Travis Bryan and George Ferrari and I were on that ship together.
Didn't know each other.
I'll be darned.
That was my conveyance to Japan.
This is my intern class at Bethesda.
That young lady in front there is Dr. Myrick.
She was the very first.
naval intern, female intern in the history of the Navy, and she did just a fine job.
Most of those guys in that picture were World War II veterans.
Some of them were ranked as high as lieutenant commander,
came back in the Navy when we went back in as interns as Lieutenant J.G.
So it was sort of an unusual thing to have been in World War II and then come back and serve again.
And you're on the top row on the left there.
Top left, I think.
One of those fellows became the first officer on the first atomic submarine that the United States had.
His name was Arnest.
That's Mr. A.J.
Foyt right there.
Right.
One thing we haven't talked about is that you served as the physician, the head physician at Texas World Speedway for several years, right?
Still designated.
Head physician.
Mr. Foyt had just backed into the wall doing 190 miles an hour out at Texas World Speedway, had crushed his helmet, and I had told him he couldn't drive in the next race
He was obtaining permission to drive, did drive in the next race, came in second and didn't remember it.
So I was right.
And he wanted to get back on and you were having a difference of opinion.
Oh, a big difference of opinion.
I didn't want him to drive at all.
Did you lose that argument?
I lost the argument, big time.
You don't win an argument with A.J.
Floyd.
That's in Bremerton, Washington, and that was made about 1998.
That's the battleship New Jersey in the background there, the large ship, and there is a World War II carrier in the background.
I don't know the name.
I can't remember which one it was, but that's the battleship New Jersey to my left in the background.
Beautiful ship, beautiful.
It is now a museum in New Jersey.
This is a group of people, and that's Rick Olivares, who is the present district commander of the VFW.
That's Fred Brown, me, and Mickey Maley, and then that's Charles Opprestini, way in the background there, commander of the American Legion.
And that was on, I think, 4th of July, Memorial Day, probably 2001 or so, at the VFW.
All very dedicated people.
Here's a guy that you might know, and those are my two children there who are now 24 and 25 years of age, and that's George Herman Bush there, number 41, and we were at the Memorial Student Center when that picture was made.
I see.
And I admire the man a great deal.
Indeed.
And see him frequently at the Bush Library.
He's one of us now.
Here we are at the Brazos Valley Veterans Memorial.
Tom, that was at the memorial.
I don't remember the date, but I'm pointing to my name that happens to be inscribed there.
And O.C.'
's name, my brother O.C., his name is there.
And my brother-in-law, Colonel Howard Vestal's name, is on there twice.
U.S.
Army and U.S.
Air Force.
So I was pointing to my name.
A beautiful, beautiful memorial.
It is.
Anybody who hasn't been out there, you need to be out there.
Here's you and your brother, our final picture.
Two brothers, and I love my brother O.C.
dearly.
We conferred frequently if we had different cases, I mean difficult cases.
We were not in practice together in the same building, but we frequently conferred with each other.
And I think he had the same love for me that I had for him.
One of the finest physicians I have ever known, one of the kindest men I've ever known.
Indeed, I had the pleasure of meeting him on a couple of occasions too.
Indeed.
A couple of fine guys right there.
We talked about that you set up your practice in Bryan in 1955.
How did you get to Bryan, Texas?
O.C.
had been sent here as a flight surgeon at the Bryan Air Force Base.
When I got out of the Navy, I got out of the Navy before he got out of the Air Force and he asked me to come down.
I came down and looked at Bryan.
There had been a drought in the area.
The ground was cracked open, the grass was brown, the trees were brown, and I said, my gosh, who would live here?
I went to Portland, Oregon, set up a practice.
It rained 365 days, and I immediately came back to the cracked brown ground.
And have been here ever since.
Ever since.
And this is over 50 years ago, so I guess you...
You delivered babies of people who have babies now, right?
There are people that I delivered who do have babies and who do come to me as adults.
And there is a physician in Bryan, and I won't call his name because he might be embarrassed, who I did deliver.
when I first came to Brighton.
And you're still practicing, you're still practicing every day.
So obviously there's a love, there's a passion there that makes you get up and go to help people every day.
Talk about
Talk about why.
You're nearly 80 years old, and a lot of people would say, well, why hasn't old Doc Cooper retired?
Why hasn't Doc Cooper retired?
Tom, as long as I have any intelligence, and I hope somebody will tell me when I don't, I will quit, and I still do an adult general practice.
I don't go to the hospital, and I do a lot of aviation medicine.
As a matter of fact, I did three Southwest Airline pilot physicals this morning.
These guys are all...
war veterans themselves, believe it or not, and then they came back and started flying for Southwest Airlines.
But I love the practice of medicine.
I love helping people, and I hope I can continue for a while.
I want to talk about that some more.
You're an FAA, Senior Aviation Medical Examiner.
Talk about sort of how you got that appointment and how that became that, because you're one of the few, I guess, in town that if somebody wants to renew their license, they got to come to you for the physical.
There are two of us who are senior examiners in town, but I think that I do the preponderance of first-class physicals, which the airline pilots must have to fly.
They have...
a physical every six months and Dr. Henry Harrison who was both a doctor of veterinary medicine and an MD was an aviation medical examiner here in Bryan and he is the one who encouraged me to go ahead and become an aviation medical examiner and
Through the years, you have to take special courses in both aviation physiology and federal air regulations to keep up, and that's what I've done.
I've kept up now for 47 years, starting on my 48th year.
My goodness.
One of the most senior examiners in the United States now.
There was one thing that happened, I know, in your experience in the war.
I believe you were on the Bennington at the time.
You weren't on the Bennington, but there was an explosion on the Bennington that killed some 103 people and severely burned a lot, and you were involved in the treatment of those.
The USS Bennington aircraft carrier was off the Rhode Island coast in 1953, and they had hydraulic catapults.
The catapult was leaking.
Fumes got into the ventilation system and exploded for some reason that I don't know why.
And 107 people were killed.
Both doctors were killed and we got 250 or 60 severely burned patients.
at the Newport Naval Hospital where I was not stationed, but they called me off the ship to come there and help with these burned people.
250 severely burned patients within about five hours.
The one time I wished that I was somewhere else and did not relish that time that I spent there, but it had to be done.
The VFW, we touched on that a moment ago, and you're a past commander of the local VFW here.
That's something that I know that you support.
Talk a little bit about the VFW, sort of some of the things they do.
The people are involved, and I know that you want more people involved with the VFW, younger people, veterans coming through, because the folks that are sort of keeping it going right now, they're not going to be able to be doing that forever.
So you need new blood in the VFW.
I'm a good example of the folks that we need to replace in that I'm 80 years old.
The VFW has a lot of civic programs such as we sponsor kids who do essays in high school.
They also have a program called the Voice of Democracy where they write speeches that they give.
And I was at the national meeting several years ago and
The young man who won the national championship got a $75,000 scholarship for winning the national championship.
So it's a good thing.
We do a lot of other civic work that is too detailed to go into right now.
And I know that you all have great ceremonies.
You did this past July the 4th.
Memorial Day, Veterans Day, July the 4th, you do it up big.
We try to honor the present and the past veterans and certainly keep the memories alive for the people who have sacrificed for this country, yes.
Jim, talk about your family.
I have six children.
I have a son 58 years old who is in Singapore right now.
He sells sound equipment and incidentally the sound equipment in Kyle Field happens to be manufactured by Meijer Sound and that's what he does.
I then have two daughters.
One is working with the Chamber of Commerce in Waco.
Another works here at the Presbyterian Church running the nursery.
I have two other sons, one who's getting ready to go to Stanford graduate school in September.
I have one son who is deceased and another son who is a motion picture cameraman.
And they all succeeded in spite of their father.
And my wife Connie, present wife Connie, did work in the healthcare industry but she now has sort of semi-retired and she told me I had to keep working.
Well I think some of those kids in school that you talked about that might be another reason why you go to work every day.
It does stimulate you when you have two kids in college.
There are no graduates of A&M.
My wife graduated from A&M and
But they've been all over Baylor, University of Texas, Texas State.
So I don't know.
I guess they all became tired of living in Bryan College Station and wanted to see the world.
Right.
So they went to other schools.
Jim Cooper, you've seen war.
You've seen war from the standpoint of a physician, which has seen really the horror of war, too.
And I know you have thoughts about war, about conflict.
and your hope that it can be avoided.
Try to voice those in the couple of minutes we have left.
Tom, war is no way to settle international problems.
Problems that are settled by war are settled in a horrific manner.
Nobody wins.
And certainly the mediation table is the way to go.
And certainly we should teach our kids to learn to come to the mediation table to try to work out
both conflicts at home and abroad.
And war is devastating in all aspects, both in human sacrifices, in geographical sacrifices, in structural sacrifices, and there are no winners, really, in any war that has ever occurred.
There are victors, but no winners.
They're all losers, any way you look at it.
I know I've had the pleasure to meet a lot of veterans through my friendship with you, which has been going on now for about three or four years.
I happen to be your physician too, Tom.
You're also my doctor.
He's so healthy looking.
That's right.
And this man is one of the reasons for that.
And Jim, thank you for your service.
And thank you, not only your service in the military, but your service to people in the Brazos Valley over the last 50 years.
incredible that what you've done over the last 50 years and that you're still doing it, keeping people healthy.
And I know that you enjoy doing it and you want to keep doing it as long as you can, right?
Tom, I'd like to go another 50 years, at least.
But I have enjoyed it.
And I thank the people of Bryan and Brazos County for allowing me the privilege to practice medicine here.
Indeed.
Thank you very much for your service.
And thank you for coming back and sort of commemorating our first show.
You're our 75th veteran, and we hope to keep on going here.
It's been an extreme pleasure, and I hope the show continues to be successful.
You've done a great job.
You've exposed the community to a lot of veterans who deserve having the exposure.
Well, the star of the show is the veterans themselves like you.
Thank you very much, Jim Cooper.
I appreciate it.
30 months ago, I chose Dr. Jim Cooper as our very first guest on Veterans of the Valley because of his personal passion for those who have served and do serve.
For more than a half century, he has been healing and mending folks right here in the Brazos Valley.
And at age 80, well, there's no end in sight.
We salute Dr. Jim Cooper for his service to our country and to our community.
And a special thanks to the Youth Adventure Program sponsored by the College of Education
and for their help on today's program.
I'm Tom Turbeville.
Join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.